---
layout: post
title: "Variable Selection II: Lasso Theory"
date: 2020-05-16
---

## Introduction 

In recent 

## The Lasso Model

$$L(\beta) = \frac{1}{2n}||y - \beta X||_2^2 + \lambda||\beta||_1.$$


Given this framework, we can interpret the variable / subset selection problem for the lasso as the question of whether the lasso estimate $$\hat{\theta}$$ has nonzero entries in the same positions as the true regression vector $$\theta^*$$ .

So how exactly can the lasso problem be used for variable selection? Due to the nature of the regularization term, the Lasso objective naturally enforces *sparsity* of the solution $$\theta^*$$: it sets some coefficients exactly to 0. In this case, we can interpret the nonzero coefficients of the solution as the selected variables. The first question to ask is how the selected subset of variables depends on the objective function. There are a few points to note about this, e.g. the norm of the regularization term and the parameter $$\lambda.$$ 

The geometry of the objective function determines the sparsity properties of the solution; note that taking $$p = 2$$ (to obtain ridge regression) does not enforce sparsity in the same way. The unit balls under this norm are uniformly convex, differently so from the unit ball of the $$\ell_1$$ norm. We can easily see that the $$\ell_1$$ unit ball is the analog of the octahedron in $$N$$ dimensions, which has linear facets. It's easiest to build this geometric intuition using the *Lagragian formulation* of the Lasso program, which is to minimize the MSE loss subject to a constraint on the $$\ell_1$$ norm of $$\beta.$$ If we look at contours of the loss function, their intersections with $$\ell_1$$ balls are more likely to be at edges / points of the octahedron, where one or more of the coefficients are zero.

The regularization parameter $$\lambda$$ plays an equally important role in which variables are selected. From now on, fix $$p = 1$$. In analyzing the Lasso model, we often see plots of the fitted coefficients against the regularization parameter $$\lambda$$. As $$\lambda$$ increases, more and more coefficients are set to $$0$$ -- once a variable is set to zero for some choice of $$\lambda_0,$$ it will be set to zero for all choices of the parameter greater than $$\lambda_0.$$ Indeed, for $$\lambda$$ chosen large enough, all coefficients will be set to $$0$$ - this is easy to see, since for $\lambda$ large enough, any increment in the solution vector will be greater than a corresponding decrease in the loss function. In practice, the parameter is chosen via cross validation. The question is then to understand how the choice of the parameter affects the variable selection procedure. Too small, and no sparsity is enforced (no variables are selected); too large, and all coefficients are selected.

## Theoretical Guarantees.

Two conditions on the design matrix $$X$$ are important when analyzing the variable selection problem:

- *Lower Eigenvalue*: 
- *Mutual Incoherence*

Using these two conditions, we can state the following theorem:

**Theorem** [Wainwright Ch. 7, Thm. 7.21]. Consider an $$S$$-sparse linear regession model whose design matrix satisfies the Lower Eigenvalue and Mutual Incoherence conditions above. Then for 

## Examples

## Extensions to M-estimators

### Example: Group Lasso



### Sources

- Wainwright, High Dimensional Statistics.

What other sources on Lasso consistency?

Paper by Jason D Lee. -- *Variable Selection on $$M$$-estimators*, another by Peng Zhao, Bin Yu -- *On the Variable Selection Consistency of Lasso*