---
layout: post
title: "Stochastic Geometry"
date: 2020-09-01
---

## Introduction

Looked into this as part of a project on TDA

We assume basic knowledge of topology in the following.

## Models for Random Complexes
Vietoris Rips complex, Cech complex.

Intensively studied model has been the random geometric graph, which has been used as a model for wireless connecivity, mobile ad hoc networks, etc.
## Thresholds on connectivity

View the question from the perspective of phase transition. What do betti numbers of random complexes look like?

Random Geometric Graphs, results from Penrose

Scaling behavior for rgg connectivity

Shapr transition, as a general phenomenon

### Sharp Thresholds for higher betti numbers.

## Conditions for homology recovery

A more statistical perspective - given random samples from a topological space, we can approxiamte its geometry by considering simplicial complexes built on these samples. When does the topology of this estimator consistent with that of the underlying space?

Can view consistency of connectivity as a specific case of homology consistency for random simplicial complex models.

**Theorem [2].** 

While we do not go fully into the proof of the proposition, the idea is to consider the projection map. For certain values of the radius parameter $\epsilon$ the map is not well defined.

There are related results, e.g. by Latschev. 


## References

- [1] *Random Geometric Complexes*, Kahle 2010
- [2] *Finding the Homology of Submanifolds with High Confidence from Random Samples*, Niyogi, Smale, Weinberger 2006
- [3] *Random Geometric Graphs*, Penrose 2002
- [4] *Topology of random geometric complexes: a survey*, Bobrowski, Kahle 2014