---
layout: post
title: "Variable Selection I: Overview"
date: 2020-02-06
---

<!--- 
Notes: the purpose of this particular article is to give a lay introduction to feature selection, see where it can be useful, but also organize my personal understanding of these techniques.

Goal is to convey theoretical guarantees and intuition on when these algorithms should and shouldn't work, backed up by  experiments?
--->
## Introduction

In the first project in this blog, I'd like to give an overview of methods in *feature selection*, a collection of techniques that try to identify collections of variables in a statistical model which are related to the. 

Such algorithms are useful for several purposes, a few of which are interpretability and parsimony. For models fit with very large numbers of features (throughout the series we'll mainly refer to such cases where $p  > n$ to be  high dimensional).

In the biological setting ... --polygenic hypothesis / omnigenic hypotheses

Drug / gene testing or discovery in GWAS .. expensive to test all of these options.

## Overview

### Variable Selection via Search

Perhaps the first types of model selection or feature selection algorithms that are proposed are *search* algorithms, which consider various combinations of the predictor variables. These subsets can be selected via brute force subset selection, or via simplified forward and backward subset selection.

We can measure the goodness of the subsets via the following measures:
- Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), 
- Mallow $$C_p,$$ 
- Adjusted $$R^2.$$
 

### Variable Selection via Optimization

However, most of those procedures are too expensive to be run on high dimensional problems. There have been many more computationally attractive alternatives that have been proposed, the most prominent of which you've likely heard of, called the *LASSO* procedure.

$$L(\beta) = \frac{1}{2n}||y - \beta X||_2^2 + \lambda||\beta||_1.$$

The Lasso program seeks to minimize the objective term above; basically using optimization and the behavior of the regularization norm as a stand-in for feature selection.

There are many similar variants of this. Luckily there's a theory that covers all of these cases, under the term **$$M$$-estimators.**

We'll cover:

- Lasso
- Group Lasso
- General $$M$$-estimators

### Variable Selection via Distributional Properties

- RATE: Variable Selection via Relative Centrality. Selects importance of variables via change in distribution omitting that variable, as measured using the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
- Knockoffs: Variable Selection using simulated 'knockoff' variables, with theoretical guarantees on False Discovery Rate.


### Variable Selection via Loss Function Variation
Jeremiah Zhe Liu's paper, and the JLMR 2016 paper that it considers as well. These ideas define the variable importance via the *Empirical Norm of the Gradient Function,*

$$\psi_p(f) = || \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_p}||_n^2$$ 

This is also similar to the idea used in analyzing convnets (alongside occlusion methods, etc. ) -- I recall we had a similar idea like this.


## Motivations

The interest in this project began during my experiences working with [Lorin Crawford](https://github.com/lcrawlab) at Brown University, where we worked on applying feature selection methods for black box models and its application to shape analysis. I hope to cover this procedure, called *RATE*, in a future post. The end result is a pipeline we named SINATRA, which combines the use of informative topological transforms, and Bayesian models + RATE to study differentiating features in classes of shapes.

My hope is to give some understanding behind the theoretical guarantees (if explored) for these different broad groups of methodologies, as well as give some small experiments to see under which circumstances each method works best.


