---
layout: post
title: "Stochastic Analysis on Manifolds I"
date: 2020-09-14
---

# Introduction

**Goal**: Define Brownian Motion on manifolds. In particular, consider the *Eells-Elworthy-Malliavin* approach to Brownian motion on manifolds. In this post we'll outline the basic approach and the main ideas, before diving more deeply into them in later posts.

What's the ultimate goal of this line of research? Stochastic analysis on manifolds yields a more refined way to analyze geometric objects and to do analysis on manifolds. Some results in the book by Hsu show how relatively well-known geometric theorems can be established probabilistic methods. A common motif in these results seems to be the connection between stochastic processes on manifolds and curvature. Eventually, these posts might start investigating these types of applications.

There are several different ways to characterize Brownian Motion on manifolds.

- Extrinsic: via the Nash Embedding theorem, and the Laplace Beltrami operator
- Local: via the heat equation on local coordinate patches.
- Intrinsic: via the *Eells-Elworthy-Malliavin* construction

# Basic Idea of the Intrinsic Approach

Basic idea: one can consider the *Laplace Beltrami* operator on a Riemannian manifold, and use this as the infinitesimal generator of a Markov process, which is exactly the Brownian motion on the manifold. 

From a technical sense, one can appeal to existence results of stochastic differential equations to show the above Brownian motion exists, but the results that were shown in Hsu's book need the Laplace Beltrami operator to be expressible as a sum of squares. As a general note, this can only be done if the manifold can be isometrically embedded into Euclidean space.

What can be done however, is to lift up the equation to the orthonormal frame bundle $\mathscr{O}(M)$ of the manifold. One can then consider Bochner's *Horizontal Laplacian* $\Delta_{\mathscr{O}(M)} = \sum_{i=1}^n H_i^2$ (which is then expressible as a sum of squares). The importance of this object is given by the fact that it relates really nicely to the Laplace Beltrami operator $\Delta_M,$ via the following lifting property:

$$\Delta_M f(x) = \Delta_{\mathscr{O}(M)}(f \circ \pi)(u),$$

whenever $\pi(u) = x.$

One can then solve an appropriate SDE on the orthonormal frame bundle, and project the solution down via the lifting property. This is the *Eells-Elworthy-Malliavin* approach to Brownian motion on manifolds.

# Some Basic Stochastic Differential Geometry

We'll first try to introduce two fundamental constructions necessary for the EEM construction of Brownian Motion as mentioned above, namely the **Horizontal Lift** and the **Stochastic (Anti)-Development** of manifold-valued semimartingales.

---
**Definition** (Manifold-valued semimartingales). Let $M$ be a smooth manifold. An $M$-valued (say continuous) stochastic process is called an $M$-valued semimartingale $X$ if $f(X)$ is a real valued semimartingale for all $f \in C^{\infty}(M).$

---

*Notes.* 1) This is actually a property of semimartingales in Euclidean space, simply by the [Itô formula for semimartingales](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/It%C3%B4%27s_lemma#Non-continuous_semimartingales). 2) If we have in addition a connection $\nabla$ on $M$, we can talk about an analog of *local* martingales of $M.$ We'll do so later.

## Horizontal Lifts.

```Comments
Vertical and horizontal bundles on principal bundles seem like a purely differential geometric construction -- I've seen some exercise on this in Lee's *Differential Geometry* text? The notion of horizontal lift also seems explored in this domain.
```

## Stochastic (Anti)-Development.


Let's first talk about the concept of **development**, which is actually a purely geometric construction. Despite the technicality of the definition, the idea just tries to capture the fact that one can trace out geodesics by "rolling without slipping." Suppose your manifold was a sphere, and you had drawn a line of ink on a flat table; rolling the sphere over the line of of ink results in a piecewise geodesic curve on the sphere.

To extend this idea more generally, one defines a general development as the solution of a certain differential equation. Now, the idea of **stochastic development** tries to do the same for a random curve like Brownian motion. We encounter a technical difficulty early on however: development only works to trace out *differentiable* curves. If we wanted to trace out a path like Brownian motion, which (recall) is [no-where differentiable](https://eventuallyalmosteverywhere.wordpress.com/2012/02/18/remarkable-fact-about-brownian-motion-3-it-is-nowhere-differentiable/), a general approach is to consider successive smooth approximations to Brownian motion, take developments of those to obtain smooth curves on your manifold, and then *take limits.*

Here's another approach that you might have thought about: if the general definition of development relies on solving a DE on the manifold, perhaps an analogous *SDE* might yield the notion of stochastic development. This is Hsu's approach in *Stochastic Analysis on Manifolds,* with the purpose that the SDE approach is more consistent with the exposition in the book and technically easier to execute.

Given the geometric picture of "rolling without slipping," the idea of **anti-development** should be intuitively clear. We paint a line of ink on our manifold instead, and roll it over a table to trace out a path.

### Why is this notion useful?

Given the geometric intuition we've just seen, we think of the stochastic (anti)-development as a way of converting manifold-valued semimartingales (or other random processes) into Euclidean valued ones, and vice versa. In this way, certain definitions become much easier, for example:

---
**Definition** (Brownian Motion on a Manifold): An $M$- valued stochastic process is a Brownian motion if and only if its stochastic anti-development is an $\mathbb{R}^d$ valued Brownian motion. 

---


*Note.* Why Stratonovich? Apparently it has a nicer formula: Itô's formula has the same form as in normal calculus. It also respects geometry and change of coordinates, as well as polygonal approximations.

## Other Methods 


### Methods that won't work
It's hard to define Gaussian random variables on manifolds - can only be defined locally on patches, and across patches, these may not agree? As such, we cannot define Brownian motion on manifolds by specifying their finite dimensional distributions and appealing to Kolomogorov's consistency theorem + Kolmogorov Centsov criterion to show existence of Brownian motion as one can do in Euclidean space. 

Note actually that if we run the above in the other direction, we can define an analog of Gaussian variables on manifolds, that is, by running Brownian motion on a manifold for fixed time. This is called a *Brownian Distribution.*

## References

- *A Brief Introduction to Brownian
Motion on a Riemannian Manifold,* Elton Hsu
- *Stochastic Analysis on Manifolds,* Elton Hsu
- *Stochastic Calculus in Manifolds,* Michel Emery
- *A Primer on Stochastic Differential Geometry for
Signal Processing,* Jonathan H. Manton